Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this
video we're going to carry on looking at
The Logical difficulties with the modern theory
of limits you find in undergraduate analysis and
sometimes calculus courses okay so here is the
main definition that we're going to be looking
at there are other definitions of limit 2 the
problems are essentially equivalent to the ones
we're going to be discussing here okay so if S1 S2
S3 is a sequence of real numbers and a is a real
number then the limit as n approaches Infinity
of snal a means okay here's the definition here's
what this means it means that for all Epsilon
greater than 0 and this Epsilon greater than Z
is meant to be a real number okay so for all
real numbers Epsilon greater than zero there
exists a capital N a natural number such that
such that if little n is bigger than or equal
to capital n and n is also a natural number so one
of the indices that appears here then the absolute
value of SN minus a is less than Epsilon okay so
we looked at what this means last time we showed
you some relatively simple kind of example
that illustrates the usual techniques that
undergraduates learn to manipulate this definition
and they get the impression that they understand
this definition but they really don't okay so the
difficulties with the definition really are sort
of threefold first of all there is the difficulty
in the fact that there are real numbers involved
and real numbers involve an infinite amount of
information so it's it's logically weak just
because of the real numbers that are involved then
there is the difficulties with the specification
of the sequence SN the point is that this term
sequence has not properly been defined okay in
mathematics we are obliged to define the terms
that we use terms like sequence function number
are not exempt from that requirement unfortunately
right so that's the problem here that we are not
saying what we mean by a sequence and the
possible difficulties will become clear in
this video we're going to see exactly how this
ambiguity here manifests itself in practice with
this definition and finally the third difficulty
and probably maybe the main one that's novel
to you is the requirement to obtain an infinite
number of NS if you actually look at The Logical
structure the definition is requiring us to find
these Capital n's one for each Epsilon greater
than zero so what it's actually asking for each
Epsilon greater than Z there is a capital N this
means that actually the definition is requiring
us to obtain infinite number of ends and as we'll
see you cannot calculate an infinite number of
ends in general all right so most explanations
of this definition in modern analysis courses
are seriously inadequate they really don't
work U most of them illustrate the story with
some simple-minded examples like the ones that
I showed you in my last lecture where there's a
functional relationship between Epsilon and n and
the idea is to try to establish this functional
relationship and then you get all the n's from
all the Epsilon sort of at once but this is in
fact rather a special situation which does not
properly reflect the main body of this definition
so most math Majors think they understand this
definition when in reality they don't if they
did understand it they wouldn't accept it as
proper pure mathematics they would be suspicious
of it they would be skeptical they would voice
their objections young people are idealistic they
are not willing to accept something which doesn't
work just because it's convenient the only way we
slip this by them is by not really fully showing
the problems to them keeping them unaware of the
difficulties that are over there in the corner
all right so in today's video we're have a good
look lay it all out one example that will clearly
illustrate the problems with the definition
of the limit okay let me Define some kind of
sequences and this is an informal definition
that sort of follows the usual practice we're
going to call these extended harmonic sequences
and they're based on this particular sequence
which is in fact actually accessible to us within
our framework because it's actually an example of
a rational poly number on sequence we to call it
the harmonic sequence okay it's a sequence given
by this rational Pol number 1 n and the sequence
that that generates or determines is 1 1/2 1/3 1/4
and so on a very simple and natural and important
sequence the reciprocal of the natural number
sequence so I think we all agree that whatever our
definition of limit might be we certainly ought to
have that this sequence has limit zero okay now
I want to define a more General kind of sequence
closely related to this harmonic sequence going
to call these extended harmonic sequences so what
is this well it's a modification of the harmonic
sequence where we allow repetitions of any or all
of the elements instead of having just one half we
can have more than one half we can have three of
them or 17 of them or three bli 497 of them we're
even going to allow an infinite number of halves
so in other words that the sequence just keeps on
going with a half so here are couple of examples
of extended harmonic sequences here's the first
one 1 1 half 1/3 1/3 1/3 one4 1/5 1/ 15 then it
carries on in some fashion so we're getting the
harmonic uh sequence here but we're getting some
of them repeated more than just once there's at
least one of every one of these but there might
be more than one example there's two ones and
there's three on 1/3 and we don't know how many
1/ fths there are because we don't know what
the next one is here's another one 1 1 a half
1/3 1/3 1/3 let's suppose that the 1/3 carry on
just keeps on 1/3 we're going to call this also
an Extended harmonic sequence all right that's
going to be our definition here's another way
of saying what an extended harmonic sequence is
it's an inductive definition all right so we say
that a sequence s is an extended harmonic sequence
precisely when first of all the first element is
one and the other requirement is that if the nth
element is 1 / k then the N plus first element is
either 1 over K as well or it's 1 / k + 1 so if
you're going one at a time let's say your current
element is 1 over 7 then the next element can be
either 1 over 7 or one over8 and those are the
only two possibilities okay so you can just carry
on creating a sequence choosing whether you're
going to have the same fellow that you already
have or whether you're going to move to the next
one okay so note that such an extended harmonic
sequence is determined by the sequence of natural
numbers or Infinity which record multiplicities
in other words if we keep a record of how many
ones we have how many halves we have how many
thirds we have how many one quarters we have
and so on keep a record of those then this
record is essentially completely equivalent
to the actual sequence itself so here there are
three ones there are two Hales there are five 1/3
there's a one4 there's 1/5 there happen to be 3
1 sixes and so on but I do want you to remember
that we are also allowing the possibility that
one of these fractions ends up going on forever
and filling out the rest of the sequence so
for example for this one the multiplicities
would be five there are five ones and then one
because there's 1/2 then two for the 2 1/3 and
then assuming that all the rest of them are
quarters we could put this symbol Infinity in
there and then that's all there would be so that
this sequence here is uh recording or describes
that uh extended harmonic sequence all right so
what we're doing here is instead of thinking about
all possible sequences I'm kind of restricting
my attention to rather special kind there are
still quite a lot of variability possible but
all the elements and the sequences we're going
to consider now are of a very particular kind
starting with one then halves then 1/3 and then
one quar and so on and I want to look at one
particular such extended harmonic sequence in
particular and it's Associated to one of the most
interesting unsolved problems in mathematics the
collapse conjecture all right so very easy to
state situation if you want to have some more
information have a look at my famous math problems
number two which is all about colat conjecture all
right so to generate a colat sequence we start
with a natural number n like one or 7 or 349 if
n is odd we compute 3 n + 1 multiply by three
and add one if n is even we compute n / two we
divide it by two and we continue so we start
with some natural number whatever it is and
then we either multiply by 3 n + 1 or we divide
by two depending on whether the what we have is
odd or even and the Cass conjecture sometimes
called the 3 n + one problem has some other
names as well is that eventually you get the
number one no matter what natural number n you
start with eventually you keep repeating these two
operations eventually you get down to the number
one it's such an easy to State conjecture it's
so enticing you can play around with all kinds
of different numbers and see that it seems to work
all the time but how it does so and why it does so
is very mysterious there's not any clear pattern
that allows you to predict in advance how long
it's going to take for this cool out sequence
to eventually get down to one so let's get a
little bit of experience suppose we start with
the number one well in that case we're kind of
finished because we have already have one so we
have one we can stop if we did keep on going we
would multiply by three and add one to get four
we would divide by two and divide by two again
we back to one and the would then repeat if we
kept on going if we start with two it's even
so we divide by two and we get one immediately at
the next step if we start with three and multiply
by three and add one we get 10 divide by two to
get five multiply by three and add one to get 16
and then a couple of divisions of two gives us
one if we start with four well we already know
what happens because it's contained in here we
start with five we already know what this happens
because it's contained in here so the next new one
is six we' have to divide by two and then we would
have three and then at that point we already know
what happens because we've already figured out
what happens with three we would get this sequence
here and it eventually get to one with seven it's
a little bit more interesting multiply by three
and add 1 22 divide by two get 11 multiply by 3
and add 1 34 divide by two get 17 multiply by 3
and add 1 get 52 divide by 2ide by two multiply
by 3 and add one divide by two divide by two
we get 10 at this stage we already have a 10
there and we know what the answer is it's going
to get to one in six more steps so you can test
it out for yourself uh it's been checked out to
many billion it always seems to work but nobody
knows what whether in fact always works even for
a very very large n maybe there's some really
huge number n for which it does never get to one
and this sequence just keeps on going higher and
higher numbers up and down up and down but keeps
on going up and up and up we don't know okay very
famous unsolved problem okay so now here is the
main object for this lecture it's what I call the
collapse extended Harmon harmonic sequence it's an
example of an extended harmonic sequence in fact
it's the only example that we're interested in in
today's lecture okay how do we generate this here
it is right here at least the starting here's how
we generate it we start with the number one which
we have to okay and we sort of think of having
a seed uh which is over here this is sort of
an auxiliary sequence that helps us generate the
actual cats extens harmonic sequence up here so
the seed is one and we have a one what we do is we
are going to run the colad sequence on one until
we get one well it's already one so we're not
going to do anything so what we're going to do is
we're going to move to the next seed which is the
next natural number bigger than the one that we
just had so our seed goes up from 1 till two and
what we're going to do now is we're going to have
a whole bunch of hat reciprocal of two and how
many of these are there going to be well as many
as we have in the colad sequence that generated
by two until we get one so we're going to run the
colad sequence starting with two I remind you that
was just two and then we divide it by two and that
gives us one so for each one of those elements of
the sequence generated by two in the colat game
we're going to write down a half once we've gotten
to the one we're going to stop with two and we're
going to go to the next seed which is three and
we're going to go to the next reciprocal which is
1/3 then we're going to run the colad game again
3 10 5 16 8 4 2 1 until we get a one and for each
one of those we're going to record a third once we
have one our seed is going to bump up to four and
we're going to uh write down a reciprocal four or
quarter and then we're going to run the colat game
again until we get one all the time writing one
quarter consistently until we get a one when we
have a one we bump up the C to the next one drop
the reciprocal to the next reciprocal 1 over fth
and carry on so I hope it's clear how we're going
to generate this colat extended harmonic sequence
the number of one FS is going to be determined
by the number of steps required in the colat
game to go from 5 to 1 once we've gotten down to
one we're going to stop with the 1/ fifths and
we're going to move on to the 1 six and then
the 17 and then one the8 and so on this is a
very computable sequence if you're computer
programmer you will easily be able to write
down a program that gener arage this sequence
probably only in a few lines it's an excellent
exercise right so exercise for programmers write
some code that generates this sequence then you
can get your computer to run it and you can
tell us what is s of 100 what's the hundredth
element in this sequence a little bit more
ambitious what's the millionth element in this
sequence okay so now we know what this colat
extended harmonic sequence is here here is the
million doll question what is the limit as n
goes to Infinity of SN what's the limit of the
sequence well the limit is zero precisely when the
colad conjecture is true if the colad conjecture
is true then the limit of this sequence is
zero why well because then every seed that
we stick in the colad conjecture will tell us
that eventually we get to one so there's only
going to be a finite number of reciprocals
of whatever seed we start with and then we
necessarily eventually move to the next seed
which is a little bit smaller there may be a
long string but eventually we're going to get to
the next one and then to the next one and so we
would eventually make our way towards zero however
if the co conjecture is not true and somewhere way
out there there is some really special number
for which the colat conjecture story just keeps
on generating higher and higher numbers and
we never get down to one in that case this
colat sequence will have the property that it's
going to carry on with 1 over n 1 over n 1 over n
infinitely often for that particular end that has
that property that disproves the colat conjecture
so this is a very interesting situation how are
we going to tell whether what the limit is and
how are we going to prove what the limit is you
see this is very different from the baby examples
that you shown in calculus and Analysis texts in
this example the full force of the ambiguity of
the potential infinite aspects of sequences comes
to the four right the fact that we may have a lot
of control about the sequence in some sense
namely we have a computer program that will
generate the sequence very reliably for us but
nevertheless mathematically we don't have enough
understanding of the underlying mathematics to
be able to tell what actually the sequence is
doing
so I think we can see the problem here that if
we want to get n's for every Epsilon suppose we
agree that the limit is zero we have some Epsilon
let's say one quarter so we'd like to know how far
do we have to go in this sequence before we can
guarantee that all the elements will be less than
one quarter well we can see exactly where that
position is it's right here okay there would be
the N the N would be 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
13 14 15 if little n is bigger than or equal to
15 then the nth term is less than one4 but how far
we had to go depended on how many of these strings
were in all of the colad sequences up to that
nend we had to know how long we had to run the
cad sequence for four and how long we had to run
the C out sequence for three and for two and for
one so there's no way with present technology
that we can find some functional relationship
between Epsilon and N even if we do have a lot
of confidence that the limit is zero there's
no escaping the fact that if you don't actually
know the collat conjecture is true if you don't
have the proof of the theorem then you are forced
if you want to check this fact to come up with
an infinite number of n's for an infinite number
of epsilons requiring an infinite amount of time
an infinite amount of computation in order to
establish this limit what's underlying some of
this discussion is the fact that there's a very
important dichotomy in the approach to infinite
sequences whatever they might be so anybody
who believes in infinite sequences really has
to belong to one of two camps there's a choice
approach to sequences and there's an algorithmic
approach to sequences for finite sequences
the difference between these two approaches is
relatively uh minor it's it's a it's a difference
but it can be over come in most situations with
finite sequence we most of the time require that
we actually specify all of the elements of the
sequence we write them all down explicitly and
then we can honestly say there is the sequence one
approach to infinite sequences is that we believe
that we can write down each of the elements of the
sequence independently of all the others we
can basically make the infinite enumeration
another approach to an infinite sequence is to
say no no we're going to stick with sequences
which are finitely specifiable that there's some
algorithm or procedure or law that generates the
sequence in the one case we are happy with having
an infinite amount of information required with
the other one we are more computer oriented and
say no no we need a finite amount of information
to specify this infinite sequence it's important
to realize that the there's a fork in the road
here okay the theory of infinite sequences is
dramatically different if you view it this way
or you view it this way and anybody who's serious
about logically getting on top of this has to make
a choice in their own minds as to whether they're
going to take this position or this position with
respect to infinite Z sequences you might like to
ask your local analyst which of these two camps
they belong to officially the position is that
pure mathematics in the year 2014 more or less
is in this Camp that's the official Doctrine but
I suspect that if you actually did a straw poll of
mathematicians you'd find that there are quite a
lot of people who have heretical positions and are
actually much more comfortable with this position
even though they may not come come out and say
so so here is a sequence but you only see a
number is written down separated by commas
on this strip of paper which keeps going in
that direction so there's an infinite strip
of paper going that direction and if we pulled
on this tape well we would be able to see more
and more entries but there's no rule written down
anywhere nobody has told us of an algorithm or a
procedure that generates this particular
sequence so there's no guarantee that we
have to be able to predict what the next one is
the next one might be 1/5 or it could also be
3,479 okay so this kind of sequence where we have
no rule there's no procedure we just imagining
that the whole sequence is on this infinite
tape this is a kind of object that people who
believe in the axium of choice say yes that's a
legitimate mathematical object now if you actually
look at this one you will say wait a minute it
doesn't that look like the the colad extended
harmonic sequence that we were looking at before
there's one one there's two halves there's 1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 1/3s there's three one4 it certainly
initially looks exactly the same as the extended
collapse sequence maybe it is the same but maybe
it's not so suppose we were asked to work with
this sequence suppose somebody ask us what is the
limit of this find and exhibit the limit of this
sequence now there's no possibility of going
to the colat conjecture and proving it in the
previous case when our sequence was given by an
algorithm generated by the colat sequence we at
least had an outside chance of some smart fellow
coming along and proving the colat conjecture
which then establishes that the limit is zero
here there is no connection directly with the
colat conjecture there's no way we can actually
prove anything about this sequence there's only
one way to see what the limit is and that's by
scrolling more and more and more and more and
more all the way to Infinity now for this kind
of sequence if you want to exhibit an N for each
Epsilon my friends I'm sorry but there's going
to be an infinite amount of work required not
just an infinite amount of work times one it's
actually an infinite times an infinite amount
of work for example let's say for the Epsilon
equals 1 you want to find out how far you have
to go before you can be guaranteed that all
the numbers are less than one you will have
to go through the entire tape all the way to
the end to infinity and establish where the
last thing that's bigger than or equal to one
is okay maybe it's here maybe it's somewhere
far down the track in any case there's no way you
can tell what the N that goes with one is until
you've looked at the whole sequence so there
you have the N for Epsilon equal 1 great and
now now you get to find the N for Epsilon equal
1 12 again it's not enough just to go there and
say well it looks like it for now on no no you
have to wind up the tape and you have to look
at the entire infinite tape yet again to determine
where exactly it starts becoming less than a half
then you have to do the same thing for a third
and the same thing for a quarter so there's an
infinite amount of infinite searches to be done
to establish that this limit is whatever it
is and this is this is the story necessarily
with any sequence which is determined by choice
so if you believe that infinite sequences
are in fact all determined by choice then
necessarily you're putting your the
onus on you to do an infinite times
an infinite amount of work every time you
want to verify a sequence's limit because
there's no algorithm or function or rule to
generate it's just given by choice it's an
infinite tape you have to look at the whole
thing to be able to decide what the limit
is so those of you who are not professional
mathematicians will say wait a minute I mean why
in the world would professional mathematicians
choose Choice over the much more sensible
algorithm approach clearly it's much more sensible
to think about infinite sequences as being
generated by by algorithms wouldn't you think just
to wrap up let's have a quick look at some of the
pros and cons of Choice versus algorithms so the
choice approach to sequences it does have some
advantages for the modern mathematician namely
you don't need to fuss around with programming
languages and algorithms you don't have to have
a prior Theory or understanding of algorithms
which is in fact itself a whole naughty subject
not at all so obvious how to set that theory
up mathematically and something that most pure
mathematicians aren't entirely comfortable with
so by thinking about Choice as our way of thinking
about infinite sequences we can avoid those issues
the cons to a choice approach to sequence include
the fact that you can't explicitly exhibit any
examples you can only exhibit examples of the
kind that I showed you where you go up to a
certain point and then you put three dots you
cannot actually exhibit in its entirety a full
Choice sequence they remain somewhere in the Never
Never Land of dreaming and furthermore you need to
rely on an axium of choice it really is a an axiim
or religious position that says yes we can do this
infinite process even if uh in fact we can't
we'll just pretend that we can just make it an
axium let's have a look at the algorithmic
approach to sequences which I have a lot more
sympathy with okay a lot more sympathy but we
should appreciate that there are also pros and
cons to it as well the pros are that first of
all it fits with a computational approach this
is what modern computers kind of do you know so
it makes a lot of sense to talk about algorithms
and so on there's lots of examples any sequence
that you or I generally use or know about is a
computational well- defined sequence there's a
algorithm that can generate it so most of the
standard sequences that you find in analysis
and so on they're all of this kind that's an
advantage the Cons with this are it's very
tricky to Define equality of algorithms it's
not entirely easy to Define even what an
algorithm is in the first place you also
need to worry about algorithms not finishing
sometimes you may have an algorithm that goes
into some kind of loop how do you detect that
that's going to mess up your computer program in
other words if you're going to rely on computer
programs for sequences you have to worry about
bugs and then there are Church touring kind of
issues that we'll talk about later on in this
course but um it's not entirely clear that what
a computable sequence is is independent of what
machine you use or what programming language
you use it's a very delicate uh subtle issue
okay so there's difficulty with both of them um
and at the very least you should demand of your
Calculus instructors and Analysis instructors
that when they're talking about sequences if
they are going to talk about infinite sequen is
they may not be willing to address the issue of
what a sequence actually is but at least try to
get them to clarify whether they're talking about
sequences which are algorithmically generated or
generated by just making an infinite number of
choices the issue was already understood very
well by the brilliant philosopher the 20th
century philosopher Ludwick Witkin sign who
stated was a strong critic of a lot of modern
mathematics and at one point he stated the
following the mistake in the set theoretical
approach consists time and again in treating laws
and enumerations as essentially the same kind of
thing and arranging them in parallel Series so
that one fills in gaps left by the other so when
which Stein talks about laws versus enumerations
he's talking about algorithms versus Choice it's
exactly this dichotomy and he recognized even
back then in the mid of the 20th century that
the analysts were basically trying to play
a game having their cake and eating it too
it doesn't work and I hope you've seen that the
modern theory of limit is essentially intricately
linked with having to do an infinite amount of
things something that you or I cannot do and
there's no need that we should pretend that we
can do an infinite number of things if we could
do an infinite number of things we could solve
so many mathematical problems immediately famous
mathematical problems the cads conjecture we could
just instantly compute take us one minute to find
out whether it's true or not point is we cannot
do an infinite number of things my friends never
could never will be able to that's the reality
of the world in which we live in and there's no
shame in being honest about it and saying yes
we cannot do this so let's not pretend that we
can in our next video we're going to look at
real numbers as koshy sequences of rationals
or more correctly as equivalent classes
of Koshi sequences of rationals and not
surprisingly you will see the same
kinds of problems emerging there the
theory doesn't work I hope you'll join me
for that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for
listening